People often wonder why some entrepreneurs have greater success than others. Is it habits, connections, luck, work ethic or any other behavior? I believe the key to success is willpower. Willpower is the ability to control yourself. It is a strong determination that allows you to do something difficult. It is a behavior we are born with more than one we learn; however, it is possible to not only learn it, but also strengthen it with constant exercise.

Willpower is just like a muscle; to keep it strong you need to constantly exercise it. People with a great amount of willpower have the discipline to develop positive, successful habits. Even with an incredible amount of talent, without the discipline and motivation to create positive habits, it can be difficult to achieve success.

Willpower and habits go hand in hand. It is critical to create good habits and take the actions necessary to stick to those habits day in and day out for greater success. Almost half of our daily actions are part of our habits and not decisions, so once the correct habits are in place, you will automatically perform those tasks on a day-to-day basis.

The best way to create and stick to a habit is to have strong motivation. It's easier to change your habits to lose weight if you have a health issue and you want to be around longer for your kids, or if your business is something you're passionate about. Having a valuable outcome associated with a habit will help you stick to that habit permanently.

The art of self-control is one that most successful individuals have mastered. Self-control enables you to avoid behaviors that don't contribute to your success and adopt those that do.

Because there is a delayed satisfaction associated with self-control, it can be easy to get off track. However if you work on sticking to those small positive habits one day at a time, it becomes easier to stay strong and achieve that delayed reward. Once a reward is achieved, it is much easier to continue sticking to your habits.